===== Enseignements =====

Ce fichier présente les enseignements structurés en six volets, issus des 670 toponymes laissés par les expéditions d’Entrecasteaux et Baudin. Chaque bouton mène vers une page détaillée.
0. Introduction
1. Les voyages d’Entrecasteaux et de Baudin
Deux expéditions (1792-1793 et 1800-1804) menées en contexte révolutionnaire et napoléonien : recherche de La Pérouse, relevés hydrographiques, collecte scientifique et mission politique.
2. Les voyages français antérieurs
Ces voyages s’inscrivent dans un siècle d’explorations françaises vers la Terra Australis, avec instructions officielles, savants embarqués et collecte naturaliste.
3. Objectifs du site
Le site documente les 670 toponymes, leurs contextes historiques, la fabrication des cartes et l’évolution des noms, pour éclairer l’empreinte française.
4. Nomenclature prudente de d’Entrecasteaux
Noms internes au voyage (navires, équipage, repères) pour rester consensuels et utiles à la navigation, avec les levés précis de Beautemps-Beaupré.
5. Nomenclature de Péron et Freycinet
Liste recomposée sous l’Empire, marquée par savants, militaires, arts et lettres, et forte empreinte napoléonienne.
6. Pertinence des nomenclatures
Deux logiques (voyage vs. récit national) largement remaniées après 1815 ; plus de la moitié des noms sont toujours en usage aujourd’hui.

0. The d’Entrecasteaux and Baudin voyages of discovery in the wake of the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic period - French Names Along the Australian Coastline
Geographical discoveries are a kind of property, less useful, without doubt, than territorial property, and forming only an imaginary wealth: but as they are connected with national self-love, unsubstantial as they are to the possessor, they have been, at all times, envied and disputed.
C-P Claret de Fleurieu, 1790
This web site provides a record of 670 French names or toponyms given to localities on the Australia coast following the voyages of discovery commanded respectively by Antoine Bruny d’Entrecasteaux (1792–1793) and Nicolas Baudin (1801–1803). Its contents examine the choice and significance of these names in the wake of the French Revolution and the era of the reign of Napoléon Bonaparte.
These place names selected during the first expedition by its commander d’Entrecasteaux and, after the return of the second expedition, by its zoologist François Péron in collaboration with Louis Freycinet, one of Baudin’s officers, reflect French knowledge, references, ideals and concerns of that time and mirror French history and culture. They provide evidence of French voyages to the south seas at a time in history when the British started to colonise parts of Australia. They bear witness to changes that affected European voyages of discoveries with an increased emphasis on data collections that involve the systematic gathering of information, facts, observations, or samples and the production of reliable and detailed charts of the world that reflected national ambitions.
The explanations given in the book for the naming of places by participants in the two voyages is an invitation to the reader to discover and understand the complex reasons which led to the choice of these place names, related as they are, to sensitive and national issues that affected France in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. Such knowledge is important as the names bestowed by the French form part of the early history of Australia. Today, on Australian maps, about half of these place names allocated by the two French
expeditions have been discarded while the remaining half often appear in a different orthographic form in conformity with the standard of the Australian English common language. This Anglicisation and the discarding of a many of the French place names based on the right of first discovery (see section 3) masks the historical circumstances that determined their selection.
For this reason, it will be helpful to the reader to be first introduced to the historical context that, at least implicitly, influenced the choice and distribution of the French names along the Australian coast.

1. The d’Entrecasteaux and Baudin voyages of discovery in the wake of the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic period
D’Entrecasteaux' s voyage
In France, in September 1791, the French Revolution, which had begun in July 1789, was still in the process of establishing a new order and was undergoing reforms. A National Constituent Assembly had been established, severely reducing the powers of King Louis XVI. His escape in June 1791, when he was attempting to seek refuge with and get help from friendly powers to restore the monarchy in France, ended with his capture in Varennes and his return to Paris. The king’s action further inflamed the discord between royalists and republicans, the latter of whom accused the king of high treason against his own people. French society was in turmoil and preparing to fight a civil war that would pit aristocrats against revolutionaries and factions of the latter against each other, as well as becoming involved in a war with European monarchies. More troubled times lay ahead.
Meanwhile, in Brest, a crew of 219 was waiting for favourable winds to embark on two vessels on an expedition ordered by decree by the newly installed National Constituent Assembly.
The expedition’s vessels were initially gabarres (flat-bottomed barges), built to the design of the architect Jean-Joseph Ginoux from Le Havre and used for river transport and coastal shipping. They were renamed la Recherche (The Seeker) and l’Espérance (The Hope), an allusion to the voyage’s principal mission to search for the missing La Pérouse. The ships were extensively refitted and reclassified as three-masted
frigates. Their hulls were doubled with pine, secured with long wide-headed nails, and caulked. Another deck was constructed between their gun-decks and holds to lodge the crews. The vessel la Recherche, formerly la Truite (The Trout), was built in 1787 and was used mainly for transporting wood for use in construction. It was approximatively 36 metres in length and 9.10 meters wide, with a draught of less than 2.5 meters. The crew was composed of one hundred and thirteen people at the time of the expedition’s departure and was captained by Antoine Raymond Joseph de Bruni d’Entrecasteaux*. L’Espérance was initially named La Durance (a French river). It was about 37 meters long, 8.45 meters wide and had 2.5 metres of draught. The frigate left port with a crew about one hundred persons and was captained by the captain was Jean-Michel Huon de Kermadec*.
The voyage’s missions included the surveying and charting of unknown coasts, the collection of specimens of fauna, flora and minerals and reporting on the people inhabiting the lands of the South Seas. A scientific team composed of astronomers, geographers and botanists was part of the crew. Some among them were struggling to gather all the material required for their work because of wartime shortages. The botanist Jacques-Julien Houtou de La Billardière* wrote:
As my objective was to work more specifically on the observations of plants, I needed a lot of paper, and I wanted to find large-size paper format. It was not at all easy to find twenty-two reams of paper, because all that was left in stores had just been given to the artillery service…
The expedition left the port of Brest at around 1 pm on 28 September, with a crew reflecting the political divisions of the country. One of the volunteers, Pierre Roch Jurien de la Gravière*, noted:
Among our officers, some might regret the abolition, others might fear the return of the privileges of the nobility. Some have embraced the revolutionary ideas with fervour, others, especially of the nobility, might have rejected them, even after having first embraced them.
Yet by the end of September 1791, we were out of the harbor from Brest. At that time, the king, brought back from Varennes, had just accepted the constitution drafted by the National Assembly. It was obvious that neither party had the power or the will to control the outcome. The people would be freed from royalty, or royalty would regain its authority and prestige. Each of us aboard our corvettes [actually, the vessels were frigates] was trying to address this alternative consistently with his passions or interests.
D’Entrecasteaux was able, with mixed success, to deal with this latent discord by urging his subordinates to focus on work of discovery. However, he had to face another type of tension between the 'savants' – the scientists – described also by Gravière:
I have already mentioned the antagonism which, since the beginning of the expedition, had manifested on our corvettes [frigates] between natural history and hydrography. Everything seemed to conspire in favour of this last science .... It should not be surprising that men who saw their life so often imperilled by the imperfection of the charts of which they saw the shortcomings and errors, every day instinctively assign the first rank to the works that could detail the charting and ensure the safety of navigation. … Reefs, rocks, shoals, impenetrable barriers, inaccessible shores or deep and safe bays… hydrography was assured of finding with them unique values for its charts. It drew on charts, with the same religious care and enthusiasm, the reef that she was proud to point out to the sailor's vigilance and the port where it invited him to enter … it was obvious that it would have all the honour and would make all the glory of our expedition…The naturalists often complained, and if they were not always right, they were not, it must be agreed, always wrong to complain.
The priority given to hydrographic investigations reflected the introduction of new scientific approaches, associated with mathematical precision and exactitude, that enabled the chief geographer of the expedition, Charles-François Beautemps-Beaupré (1766–1854)*, to chart with greater accuracy the extensive channels and inlets sheltered from strong wind between the south-eastern coast of Van Diemen's Land (Tasmania) and Bruny Island.
After reaching the western part of New Caledonia and searching in vain for traces of La Pérouse and his expedition, the voyage sailed back along other unmapped sections of the Australian coast, methodically surveyed the Archipelago of Recherche (southwest coast of Western Australia) and revisited the east coast of Tasmania (fig.1).
Fig.1 : From Beautemps-Beaupré, C.-F.(Ed), 1807. Atlas du voyage de Bruny-Dentrecasteaux, plate1 ‘Carte générale de la Nouvelle Hollande et des archipels du Grand Océan, qui sont au nord et à l'est de cette terre’. Focus on New Holland. The route of the vessels has been added in aqua-blue (cyan) for the year 1792 and in purple for the year 1793
Source: National Library of Australia
The return of the expedition to France was accompanied by tragedy and many unexpected challenges. Scurvy and dysentery had claimed the lives of many officers and sailors, including those of the commander d’Entrecasteaux, off Hermit Island, part of Papua New Guinea, in July 1793, and of his successor, Alexandre d’Auribeau, in Java, in February 1794. Aboard L’Espérance, Huon de Kermadec, had died earlier, in May 1793, in New Caledonia, following a two-month illness that led to etic fever (‘fièvre étique’).
In late October 1793, when the ships reached Java, governed at that time by the Dutch, the news that Louis XVI had been executed and that Revolutionary France was at war with several European nations, including Great Britain and Holland, widened the split between the expedition’s republican and royalist camps. Those amongst the crew who sympathised with the republican cause were made prisoners by the Dutch colonisers. In addition, the French commander was unable to pay the Dutch administration for accommodation, food and hospital bills, and for the repair of the two ships, which were in poor condition. Hence, the vessels were transferred to the Dutch East India Company at Batavia, on condition that the Dutch would repatriate crew members who wished to return to France, including the prisoners.
The most senior remaining navy officer of the expedition, Élisabeth-Paul-Édouard de Rossel*, negotiated to bring back to France on board the Dutch fleet the collections and charts made during the voyage. A royalist, he embarked on a convoy with the members of the crew who were attached to the monarchy, while crew members with republican loyalties returned on other vessels via the Isle de France (Mauritius). While the d’Entrecasteaux expedition was underway, France had conquered Holland and renamed it the Batavian Republic. Accordingly, the Dutch convoy was now viewed as an enemy of Britain and its ship carrying the expedition’s papers and collections was boarded off St Helena by the British ship HMS Sceptre under Captain Essington, who confiscated the French samples, rough charts and records.  The five other Dutch ships of the convoy were captured later and the French officers made prisoners. Rossel settled in London after negotiating with the British for permission to work on the hydrographical documents and the findings of the expedition, collaborating with the first hydrographer to the admiralty, Alexander Dalrymple, to copy the charts that caught the British Admiralty's eye.
Baudin's voyage
The French Revolution had all but ended on 9-10 November 1799, when Napoléon Bonaparte in a coup d’état seized power over the government of le Directoire, leading to the drawing up of a new constitution and the establishment of le Consulat, with Bonaparte elected as Premier Consul at its head (see entries for Consulat and Directoire in glossary). With his associates he proclaimed: 'Citizens, the revolution is based on the principles that started it. It is over'. In the war against the Second Coalition (1798–1802) an alliance of Britain, Austria and Russia, Bonaparte led the French armies to a number of victories, among them his decisive defeat of the Austrian army at the Battle of Marengo* in northern Italy, in 1800, which helped to restore the pride and confidence of French citizens in their government and nation.
Bonaparte surrounded himself with teams of scientists and other experts to govern and reform the country efficiently. During the period 1800–1802, France emerged from deep political and economic insecurity and instability due to Bonaparte’s ability to pacify the country and heal its political and religious divisions.
In response to representations from a delegation of eminent members of the Institut National des Sciences et Arts on 25 March 1800, Bonaparte consented to the dispatch of an expedition on a voyage of discovery to New Holland (Australia) and Van Diemen’s Land (Tasmania), with its main objective to chart the yet unknown parts of its southern coasts, as well as to study its natural history and to collect specimens of its fauna, flora, minerals and rocks. The expedition was placed under the command of Nicolas Baudin, who in 1796-1798 had led a successful voyage to the West Indies from where he brought back a large collection of plants, birds and insects. The two ships of the expedition were the corvettes, le Géographe and le Naturaliste (fig. 2 and 3). The former was a 20-gun Serpente-class corvette, named Uranie in 1797 and renamed Galatée in 1799. Her builder, who had not been paid, refused to launch her until she was bought for the voyage, at which time she was renamed le Géographe. Le Naturaliste was first built as a gabarre and named La Menaçante. Bought for the voyage, she was renamed le Naturaliste in 1800 and was refurbished and reclassified as a corvette.
Fig.2: Le Géographe, detail of the watercolor on the opening page of Baudin’s personal journal
Source: Archives Nationale de France, MAR/5JJ/35
Fig.3: Le Naturaliste, detail of the watercolor on the opening page of Baudin’s personal journal
Source: Archives Nationale de France, MAR/5JJ/35
The corvettes left Le Havre on the 19th of October 1800 with much more pomp and fanfare than that accompanying the departure of the d’Entrecasteaux expedition, almost ten years earlier. Hamelin, the captain of le Naturaliste described their departure:
At 9am, we went out the Vieux Bassin of Le Havre with a fresh breeze from ESE, with our topsails and topgallants, left the jetty, passed under the tower of Francois 1er, greeted by cries of Vive la République. The préfet for maritime affairs, Bertin, was there, and a bourgeois orchestra played patriotic anthems, especially the Chant du départ.
Journal of Hamelin, Le 27 vendémiaire An 9” (19 October 1800).
The Chant du départ is a war song composed during the Revolution and referred to as 'brother of the Marseillaise' by the soldiers of An II (Year 2 of the republican calendar). Bonaparte liked it better than the Marseillaise and made it the official anthem of the first Empire. After this solemn departure, the voyage was considered by Baudin as 'the most painful I ever did', especially because of 'the fussy line of conduct that each (member of the crew) follows'. Nevertheless, the cartographical and scientific work was extensive. Baudin wrote to Jussieu in November 1802, during his long stopover at Port Jackson (Sydney) between the two stages of his of reconnaissance:
The land of Leuwin, those of Concorde, and Witt, the Entrecasteaux Canal, Isle Maria and its surroundings, the eastern coast of the large island of Diemen land, the Straits of Bass Strait and Banks Strait, and all the southwest coast of New Holland from Wilson's Promontory to the islands of St Peter and St Francis have been recognised in a way sufficient for navigating safely ... The materials that I send to citizen Buache for the construction of the map of the various parts I have just mentioned will provide a very different configuration from that which it has been supposed to date ...
The 'materials' (rough charts and geographical data) that Baudin mentioned were brought back to France on board the Naturaliste, arriving at Le Havre on the 7th of June 1803. That was shortly after the breakdown of the Treaty of Amiens (25 March 1802-18 May 1803) and the resumption of colonial and European hostilities with Great Britain.
In the meantime, le Géographe had carried out further surveying work in Australia before Baudin decided in July 1803 to head back to France. Le Géographe arrived at the port of Lorient in Brittany on 24 March 1804 without the expedition commander, because Baudin had died from tuberculosis on the Isle de France (now Mauritius) in September 1803.
Less than two months after le Géographe’s return, in May 1804, Bonaparte, Consul for life by plebiscite since 1802, became Emperor of the French as Napoléon the first (his coronation took place on the 2 December 1804).  Le Consulat and the 'République française' were abolished together with the revolutionary calendar, and the Gregorian calendar was restored. However, administrative reforms continued to be pursued. It was during this new imperial period that the forms of the monarchy and its etiquettes were progressively re-established. It was also then that the atlases and narratives of the d’Entrecasteaux and the Baudin expeditions, in which the place names were registered, were edited and published.

2. Earlier French voyages and the ‘discovery’ of parts of Australian coasts
The voyages of d’Entrecasteaux and Baudin can be regarded in the broader context of earlier French voyages to the South Seas in search of unknown places and the mysterious land, the mythical Terra Australis Incognita, later referred to as Australasia, and then more frequently by the French name of Terres australes, which was thought to be the last part of the world undiscovered by European.
From the mid-eighteenth century the French Académie des sciences and the Académie de Marine, as well as the publication of Buffon*’s Natural Histories and, more fundamentally, the once celebrated Histoire des navigations aux Terres Australes by Charles de Brosses*, published in 1756, suggested that governments should take charge of voyages of discovery and recommended the inclusion of a scientific team as part of the crews of expeditions. It was in keeping with these new expectations that official instructions to leaders of expeditions included a framework within which officers were required to operate. It was with such instructions, which designated the areas to be explored and the specimens of interest to natural history to be collected, that first the Bougainville expedition (1766–1769) and later the La Pérouse expedition (1785–1788) set out on their respective voyages. While the former completed a circumnavigation of the world, the latter’s expedition was shipwrecked in the Vanikoro Islands, south of the Santa Cruz archipelago, within the Solomon Islands, in the Pacific Ocean. During their travels both commanders named many places along their routes.
However, these two major expeditions did not contribute much to the knowledge of Australia’s coastlines. Antoine de Bougainville (1729–1811) sailed along the outer edge of what is now known as the Great Barrier Reef without sighting Australia and La Pérouse did not organise surveying missions along the Australian coast and stopped only briefly at Botany Bay, where he anchored just a few days after the arrival of the First Fleet commanded by Captain Arthur Phillip.
By contrast, the ships of the two other French expeditions reached Australia in separate voyages in 1772 and sketched some sections of the Australian coast.
Marion Dufresne’s stopover in the eastern coast of Tasmania
Marc-Joseph Marion Dufresne (1724–1772), a trader and planter based in Isle de France (Mauritius), served as an officier bleu in the French Royal Navy and as a captain for the French East India Company. At the invitation of the island’s administrator, Pierre Poivre, he set sail on 18 October 1771 with two ships—le Marquis de Castries and le Mascarin. The expedition had two main objectives.
The first was to return the Polynesian Aotourou to his homeland. Aotourou had been brought to France from Tahiti by Bougainville, who later arranged for his return by sending him to Isle de France, with instructions to Poivre to organize the final leg of the journey eastward to Tahiti. Tragically, Aotourou died of smallpox in Madagascar on 6 November 1771, before the plan could be completed.
The second objective was to explore the southern reaches of the Indian and Pacific Oceans. While Marion Dufresne continued his exploratory route to the Pacific, his two ships collided, causing considerable damage. The commander decided to land on the eastern coast of Van Diemen’s Land (Tasmania, 4 March 1772) to re-mast one of the ships and replenish them with fresh water. He encountered Aboriginal Tasmanians, but the meeting turned ugly due to misunderstandings. As a result, stones were thrown at the crew and the Aborigines were fired on, with at least one of them being killed. Marion Dufresne, with some of his companions, was himself killed a few weeks later by Maoris in New-Zealand. No Australian places were named or claimed by the French during this voyage.
Saint-Aloüarn’s expedition to Western Australia
The second French expedition was commanded by Yves Joseph de Kerguelen de Trémarec (1734–1797), entrusted by King Louis XVI to search for the unknown Southern Land. Kerguelen was sailing in La Fortune, and his second in command, Louis-Francois de Saint-Aloüarn*, was captaining the gabarre Le Gros Ventre. The two ships became separated in the Indian Ocean. Kerguelen discovered a fog-shrouded island in the southern Indian Ocean and, believing it to be the unknown land, sailed back to France to report his discovery. The island group now bears his name. Following his instructions, Saint-Aloüarn continued to sail east and made landfall on the western Australian coast close to Cape Leeuwin, on the 17 March 1772. During the seventeenth century the Dutch and the British explorer Dampier (1651–1715) had already visited this coast, then referred to as New-Holland. Following the coast to the north, Saint-Aloüarn anchored at Dirk Hartog Island, where he named pointe des Hauts fonds, the most northern cape of this peninsula. He organized a ceremony to claim possession of the land and another to bury one of his crew members, Massicot, who had likely died of scurvy. As a sign of remembrance, based on the journal of Sergeant Lafortune and mentionned by Godard and Kerros, Massicot’s name was given to the bay where he was buried; However, this place name was never adopted in the French atlases published by later voyages that visited the west coast of Australia. Then, Saint-Aloüarn sailed north as far as Melville Island. Saint-Aloüarn died, as well as his second in command, a few days after their return to Isle de France. No action was taken by the French king to take possession of the land.
These two earlier French voyages were important not so much for what their crews sighted, or missed, of the Australian coast, as for the interest and cautiousness they generated for the d’Entrecasteaux and Baudin expeditions covered in this book. The two captains made a point of finding the places their countrymen had visited and comparing their own bearings and sketches with those of Marion Dufresne and Aloüarn. At the time, this comparative method was used to update the existing charts and to progressively improve their accuracy.

3. Objectives of the site
The successive critical circumstances and national mutations outlined above permeate the nomenclatures applied to the geographical features of the Australian coast by participants in the d’Entrecasteaux and Baudin voyages of discovery.
The site explicitly addresses these nomenclatures and the significance of the 670 place names recorded on the official atlases of the two voyages. It outlines their embedded connections with French history by pointing out the heroes, events and myths that contributed to the building of the French nation. It shows that the history and cartographical fixation of the place names leads 'to identifying the actors involved in the naming more than the places themselves'. In this context, the immediate actors involved in the naming were d’Entrecasteaux and the editors of the atlases of the two voyages. They were acting under the direction of the French government and scientific authorities, as representatives of their national ideals and values. It is this influential and cultural background the book seeks to highlight.
It is important to note that no inquiries about local, pre-existing names were made by the crews of the two expeditions in their encounters with the 'naturals'. The French names along the Australian coast instead recognise the expeditions’ ships, pay tribute to their crews and the kings and authorities who sponsored these voyages and acknowledge some of the great men who brought honour to the French nation. The commanders of the two expeditions, d’Entrecasteaux and Baudin, named localities and geographical features in accordance with the European notion of 'the right of first discovery', introduced in the late 15th and 16th century which 19th-century European historians designated as 'the period of great discoveries'. This notion gave the right to sea captains who visited coastlines yet unknown to Europe to name geographical features they were the first to chart, on behalf of king and nation. This tacitly agreed naming practice among Europeans intensified towards the end of the eighteenth century when rival European powers were competing to extend their respective presence throughout the world.
The ‘right of the first discovery’ did not necessarily confer a right to colonisation, nor were such opportunities always pursued, although it was an option available to the nation of the first discoverer. Neither the Dutch nor the French authorities took up this right in Australia. However, the practice of Europeans to apply proper names to geographical places in Australia disregarding preexisting native names served them in their claims for the southern lands. The exercise of these naming rights also resulted in discord between François Péron* and Louis de Freycinet*, who respectively served as zoologist and naval officer on the Baudin expedition, and who edited the French narratives and atlases of the voyage, and the English navigator Matthew Flinders (see section 5).
Fundamentally, the d’Entrecasteaux and Baudin nomenclatures produced two contrasting lists of names that reflect the evolving political and cultural changes affecting the French nation from the Revolutionary to the Napoleonic period. In contrast with that of the d’Entrecasteaux expedition, and unparalleled in European voyages of discoveries, the place names chosen by Baudin were not retained by his zoologist François Péron and his officer Louis Freycinet, who, in the absence of their deceased commander, were appointed in Paris at their request as editors of the narrative and the atlases of the voyage. With a few exceptions, Péron and Freycinet replaced Baudin’s names when preparing the atlas and narrative between 1805 and 1807 with others generally reflecting the French national spirit of the Napoleonic time, when voyages on the high seas and the discovery of distant lands played a less important role in Napoléon’s strategy. In contrast, Rossel, who edited the journals of d’Entrecasteaux’s voyage, retained all the names his commander had given to locations on Australia’s coasts, despite his death during the course of the voyage.

4. D'Entrecasteaux’s cautious choice of a politically neutral nomenclature to honour his crew and benefit navigation
To name geographical locations, the expedition commander relied on the hydrographic surveys and sketches provided by his geographers and officers. The procedure was as follows: Firstly, the ships’ hydrographers (given the title 'engineer geographers' then on later voyages of discovery) recorded the geographical coordinates of the shapes and indentations coastline, sketched them roughly and then drafted an early chart. They used the letters of the alphabet A, B, C… to designate capes, bays and other geographical shapes that made up the coastline. The commander would then give a name to the geographical features identified by his engineer geographers. He also entered into the pages of his sea journal the locality names he had chosen.
The edition of d’Entrecasteaux sea journal
Following the short-lived peace treaty signed at Amiens in 1802, the British returned the d’Entrecasteaux expeditions journals, charts and papers to France (see above, footnote 15). The royalist Rossel, who was the last commander of the expedition after the death of d’Entrecasteaux and his successors, returned to France from London at that time, and received permission to edit the journal of his former commander. It came with the proviso that he must cooperate with Beautemps-Beaupré, the expedition’s hydrographer, now working at the dépôt des cartes et plans de la Marine (the State cartographic service and hydrographic office) where he oversaw the editing the atlas of the d’Entrecasteaux voyage, and added the names chosen by d’Entrecasteaux onto the charts. The atlas was published in 1808 to great acclaim by the press and the scientific community.
First page of the Atlas du voyage de Bruny-Dentrecasteaux, contre-amiral de France, commandant les frégates la Recherche et l'Esperance, fait par ordre du gouvernement en 1791, 1792 et 1793 publié par ordre de sa majesté l'empereur et roi, sous le ministère de son excellence le vice-amiral Decrès ..  by Beautemps-Beaupré, C.-F., Bruny-d'Entrecasteaux, A.R.J. (1807)
Source : National Library of Australia .
A nomenclature that pays tribute to the voyage
In this altas, the Carte générale de la Nouvelle Hollande et des archipels du grand ocean (plate 1, https://nla.gov.au/nla.obj-230810237/view ) and 10 other plates show 68 new place names for locations along parts of the Australian coastline visited by the expedition, all defined in the first part of this book. Their selection must be viewed in the context of the tense revolutionary situation and the civil war in France, which clearly influenced the commander’s choice. D’Entrecasteaux cautiously avoided choosing names with a connotation too obviously royal, noble or revolutionary. The bestowing of such names would have exacerbated the underlying tensions among his crew. In avoiding political or doctrinal references, his chosen names pay tribute to his crew, aspects of the expedition or relate to natural features discovered along the Australian coast. Diplomatically, D’Entrecasteaux also acknowledged Saint-Alloüarn’s nautical work by naming a group of islands near Cape Leeuwin after him*. D’Entrecasteaux was also aware of the violent episode between Marion’s crew and the Tasmanians, and it was with relief and recognition that he reported that to the natives’ credit, during his own voyage, the latter were 'kind, without mistrust', with 'peaceful dispositions'. He considered the hypothesis that Marion had met a different group of 'ferocious savages' (see his chapter XI, p. 228–257) rather than the kind and cordial of the inhabitants of the coasts observed by Captain Cook at Adventure Bay, Captain Cox at Oyster Bay, and by his own expedition in Port du Nord. He also believed that the encounter did not take place at Frederik Hendrick Bay, as Marion thought, by basing his deduction on his own bearings and the summary of Tasman’s voyage given by Valentijn (1724–1726), but that it had occurred in a bay further east-north-east, which he named Baie Marion*. As well as honouring the achievements of these two earlier explorers with place names, he recognized the work of his officers and crew, who were gratified at having place named after them, regardless of their diverse political views. Other names he selected were those of his two frigates, of daily challenges (Cap des Contrariétés (Cape Contrarieties, in Tasmania) and others which recognised the geography and natural history of the coasts.
In contrast, conceived amidst the Napoleonic empire, Péron and Freycinet’s nomenclature did not follow d’Entrecasteaux’s tactful neutrality.

5. Péron and Freycinet’s nomenclature as an embodiment of the new French national narrative
The itinerary followed by the Baudin expedition
As Baudin’s voyage was dedicated to science, and not war, the commander was provided with a British passport that allowed his two corvettes [frigates] to pass through the British blockade of the French coasts, despite Britain and France being at war. However, the British authorities were concerned about Baudin’s mission as they had newly colonised New South Wales and were contemplating future settlements on land the Baudin expedition was assigned to explore. Hence, the navigator Matthew Flinders was tasked by the British admiralty in command of the HMS Investigator with the mission to circumnavigate the South Land (Australia) and to survey its unknown coasts. Péron and Freycinet’s nomenclature bears witness to the ongoing rivalry between the French and the British in giving names to places that clearly exalt their own nation and authorities.
As the departure of the ships from their stopover at Isle de France (Mauritius) was much delayed by the red tape and the unhelpful attitude of the authorities, Baudin arrived in what are now Australian waters during the season of rain, storms, and shortened days. For this reason, the captain changed his schedule, starting his survey along the west coasts of New Holland, parts of which had already been visited in the seventeenth century by the Dutch, instead of the yet unknown south coast. The Dutch had divided the western part of New Holland into geographical regions to which they had given Dutch names (for example, the name 'Landt van de Leeuwin/The Land of the Leeuwin after the ship Leeuwin captained by Jan Fransz who charted its coast in 1622). The Baudin expedition surveyed this coast in more detail, naming uncharted geographical features such as the Baie du Géographe (Geographe Bay)* after one of the voyage’s corvettes. Having surveyed the coast of western Australia, Baudin continued for a stopover at Timor. From there he sailed directly to Tasmania where he extensively explored the eastern parts of the island coastlines, assigning many place names to the localities he visited. It was not until March 1802 that Baudin started a running survey of the unknown southern coast of the continent, starting from the East. To his great surprise, on the 8–9 April, off what is today the coast of South Australia, he sighted the ship commanded by Flinders, who had already started the exploration of this coast, but sailing from the west. The encounter between the two captains has been described in many publications which tell us that they exchanged information with great civility but also misunderstanding and bitterness on the French side. The fact that Baudin and his crew had a British rival who had already completed part of the French discovery mission was a blow to him and a great disappointment. Péron and Freycinet attempted to make up for these missed opportunities by assigning an unusual number of Napoleonic names to the south coast and to confirm that their ships had visited and charted these shorelines.
After completing his survey of parts of Australia’s southern coast, Baudin headed east again for a long stopover in Port Jackson (June–November 1802) to provide rest for his sick crew and to purchase a schooner suitable for close inshore surveys. Following his departure from Sydney, Baudin revisited Tasmania and sent parties to survey King and Hunter Islands in Bass Strait in December 1802. In January–February 1803 the expedition returned for a second time to further explore the south coast of Australia. Baudin was the ‘first’ to circumnavigate Kangaroo Island, which he named Île Borda*, and which Péron and Freycinet renamed Île Decrès*. Baudin sent his chief geographer on missions to explore what he named the Golphe de la Misanthropie and Golphe de la Mélomanie, renamed later by Péron in honour of the imperial couple, Joséphine* and Bonaparte*. However, it was Flinders who had 'the priority of discovery', and he finally named them the Gulf St Vincent and Spencer Gulf.
In March–April 1803, the expedition surveyed once more the west coast of Australia to check and complete previous bearings and coordinates of the geographical features they had ‘discovered’.
The routes of the Géographe, the Naturaliste and the Casuarina following the two campaigns of the voyage, the first campaign in 1801–1802 shown in grey, green and red lines, and the second campaign in 1802–1803 in black lines.
Source: The Baudin Legacy Project
Baudin expedition track chart — Source: The Baudin Legacy Project
See also the voyage timeline
A nomenclature mirroring the spirit of France during the Napoleonic era
In 1804–1805, in Paris, as a prejudicial press expressed criticism of the late and rather unjustly maligned Baudin, the promotion of his successful voyage became difficult. Péron took it upon himself to give the credit for the expedition’s achievements to the Navy Minister, Denis Decrès*, who then appointed Freycinet to edit the atlas of the voyage, while the Minister of the Interior, Jean-Baptiste de Nompère de Champagny*, entrusted Péron with the writing of the official account of the expedition. Napoléon authorised the publication of these volumes in 1806.
The historical narrative of the voyage, titled Voyage de découvertes aux Terres Australes exécuté sur les corvettes le Géographe, le Naturaliste et la Goëlette le Casuarina pendant les années 1800, 1801, 1802, 1803 et 1804, was published in two volumes, in 1807 and 1816. The first edition of the first volume was associated with the publication of an illustrative atlas in two volumes. The first volume of the historical atlas gathered drawings and portraits from the expedition’s artists, Charles Alexandre Lesueur and Nicolas Petit, that illustrate vividly Péron’s text. The second volume contains fourteenth charts, including the first complete map of Australia, by Freycinet, bearing the date 1811.
Péron died before the publication of his second volume of the historical narrative of the voyage, completed by Freycinet, and first issued after the fall of the Napoleonic empire. In 1812, Freycinet also completed the compilation of the charts of a more detailed nautical and geographical atlas, in which all the selected place names are shown. This later atlas signed 'Louis Freycinet capitaine de frigate commandant le Casuarina pendant le voyage' ('Louis Freycinet, captain, in command of the Casuarina during the voyage'), differs from that of the d'Entrecasteaux expedition in that it does not prominently feature the name of its commander, Baudin, on its first page and in its title. Though, in the nautical and geographical account published in 1815, that complements this atlas, Freycinet, under pressure from his superiors in the navy, reintroduced the name of his commander in the title.
The nomenclature’s place names can be tracked in these successive publications.
First page of the Voyage de découvertes aux Terres Australes partie navigation et géographie by Freycinet, L. (1812 [sic, published in 1815]), Atlas. de l'imprimerie royale.
Voyage de découvertes aux Terres Australes — Freycinet (1812/1815)
Source : National Library of Australia
Confident in the goodwill of the Napoleonic regime and of their now more respected place in the scientific community, Péron and Freycinet worked with enthusiasm on the account of the voyage and the changes to its nomenclature of places ‘discovered’ by the French, giving priority in their selection to scientific authorities and national icons who, at the time, made the nation proud. Napoléon was developing his expansionist plans, while the revolutionary ideals were shifting. The emperor, on the one hand, set aside the revolutionary and democratic notions of liberty and equality that had become too restrictive to serve his purposes while, on the other hand, giving the notion of fraternity a strong national direction in which he himself embodied the role of the gifted leader of the great French nation. With the coronation of Napoléon and his first wife, Joséphine* (December,1804, at Notre Dame de Paris), the emperor re-established a strict etiquette where officers and scientists became part of a hierarchical order of precedence, mirrored in Péron and Freycinet’s choice of place names.
Hence, Péron and Freycinet re-aligned the voyage’s nomenclature with Napoléon’s politics and ideals, avoiding any reference to revolutionary leaders and focussing mainly, apart from a few personal choices, on the most officially acknowledged scientific, cultural, military and political actors of the nation.
Overall, three quarters of the place names recognise personalities whose actions or works were seen as a tribute to the French people who made up what became known since the French Revolution as the ‘Nation’. About half of them (228) were representative of French knowledge and culture, comprising the names of the French scientists and, to a lesser extent, the names of French literary and artistic figures. The second important class of place names was representative of person from the political, administrative and military spheres, including the names of past and contemporary French senior officers (158), plus, not surprisingly, those of Napoléon and members of his extended family (25). The names Bonaparte and Napoléon were assigned to the most significant geographical features discovered on the voyage. This category also included some names alluding to French military victories (29).
A further sixteen per cent of the place names (99) honoured crew members and referred to the ships engaged in the voyage. Some of the crew members were generously acknowledged with several place names, especially Péron himself and the geographer of the expedition, Charles Boullanger* (4 place names each), the artist Charles Lesueur*, the botanist Jean Baptiste Leschénault*, the second geographer Pierre Faure*, and Louis Freycinet (3 place names each). In contrast to the d’Entrecasteaux expedition, the undoubted achievements of the commander of the later expedition, Baudin, were not acknowledged with a single name. Jacques Félix Emmanuel Hamelin, his second in command, was honored with two place names in Western Australia.
Only eight per cent of the place names (46) describe the geography or natural history of the visited coasts.
The place names that reflect the central role played by scientists in French maritime voyages and national institutions
Over and above the scientific nature of the voyage, the importance of choosing place names to pay tribute to persons versed in the sciences reflects the high regard in which French officers like Freycinet, and naturalists like Péron held scientific knowledge and methods.
Both recognised the names of scientists who had contributed directly or indirectly to the development and modernisation of the French navy. Although the French Revolution weakened the navy through the forced exile of most officers, who faced possible execution due to their aristocratic origin, and by the closure of the big maritime schools where officers were traditionally trained, this scientific culture was still passed down from senior officers to naval cadets such as Freycinet. Admittance for service in the navy required applicants to pass entry tests by answering questions on nautical theory and practice. Promotion to midshipman involved further exams that assessed a cadet's knowledge 'on all branches of mathematics applied in navigation'. Hence the nomenclature includes the names of many mathematicians whose research and publications were familiar to naval officers, plus the names of the editors of the two major 18th century textbooks of mathematics used as primary references in the navy.
This choice of names also mirrors the emperor’s penchant for mathematics and physics. In his youth Napoléon dreamt of becoming a new Galileo or even a Newton. More generally, Napoléon Bonaparte greatly valued scientific competence, and became as early as 1797 a member of the Institut National des Sciences et des Lettres (see the glossary), the national institution which replaced the old academies of sciences, abolished by the Revolution because of their monarchic origins. At the Institut, Napoléon met famous scientists such as the mathematicians Gaspard Monge* and Pierre-Simon de Laplace*, and the chemist Claude Berthollet*. Under Napoléon ‘s command they all took part in the campaign of Egypt (1798-1801) to scientifically investigate the history and geography of the region and to evaluate its various potentials. These scientists, with other colleagues were among the founding fathers of the new Ecole Polytechnique (see the glossary). Napoléon was deeply committed to the Polytechnique and offered scholars at this institution the opportunity to participate in the direction or management of the country, with the aim of developing a methodical and consistent political programme. Some of them became his ministers (Laplace, Fourcroy*). Others became directors of major institutions and elite schools, such as Gaspard Clair François Marie Riche de Prony*, who became director of the Ecole Nationale des Ponts et Chaussées (the National School of Civil Engineering), or Jean Baptiste Joseph Delambre* who was appointed director of the Paris Observatory, or Louis-Bernard Guyton De Morveau* and Monge both successive directors of the Polytechnique. All these names are included in the nomenclature of Péron and Freycinet.
Some other scientists were members of the recently established Bureau des Longitudes (Board of Longitude, see the glossary). They were keen to introduce the Decimal system to the navy and were all assigned at least one place name. These members published a favourable review of Freycinet's work, with comments by Delambre and others correcting errors relating to the coordinates of places. They also compared data of geographical coordinates and their accuracy with that from the d’Entrecasteaux, Baudin and Flinders expeditions.
Similarly, Péron and Freycinet’s nomenclature pays tribute to past generations of mathematicians and astronomers who were inspired by each other’s theories. For example, in South Australia the naming of Baie Pascal*, Cap Fermat* and Cap Bernouilli* after Blaise Pascal, Pierre de Fermat and Daniel Bernouilli, respectively, recognises the work of three mathematicians who developed the theory of the probability and variability applied by naval officers and hydrographers to calculate positions at sea. The nomenclature also epitomises teams involved in major scientific research; for example, Charles Marie Lacontamine* and Pierre Bourguer* who contributed to the solution of the geodesic controversies during the 18th century about the shape of the Earth and whether the poles were flattened or rounded. Their names were given to two neighboring islands in South Australia. Both went to Peru to measure the meridian arc between Quito and Cuenca on the equator, while Pierre Louis Moreau de Maupertuis*, together with Alexis Clairaut* made an expedition to Lapland to determine the shape of the North pole. The work of all these mathematicians was recognised by giving their names to places on the coastlines of what is now known as Eyre Peninsula.
The end of the eighteenth century was a time when, to use current terminology, nautical sciences and technology were working closely together to improve naval shipbuilding and search for reliable methods to accurately calculate longitude at sea. Freycinet and Péron’s nomenclature acknowledges the names of talented engineers and instrument makers who invented or improved new methods in cooperation with scientists and naval officers. Cap Bélidor* honours a French engineer, author of L'architecture hydraulique (published in four volumes from 1737-1753). Cap Sané* (Kangaroo Island) honours Jacques-Noël Sané who conceived standardised designs for ships. Cap Lenoir* honours Etienne Lenoir who made instruments such as the repeating circle for measuring distances used during the d’Entrecasteaux and Baudin voyages. Cap Berthoud* in Tasmania and Ȋle Berthoud in Western Australia honors the Swiss-born Ferdinand Berthoud who worked for the French navy in the development of sea chronometers. The Baudin expedition carried four chronometers made by Berthoud; numbers 31 and 38 were assigned to the Géographe, and the two others to the Naturalist, with the officers given the task of testing their accuracy. Berthoud’s Traité des horloges marines, de la mesure du temps ou supplément au Traité des horloges marines, 1787 and Traité des montres à longitude were both in the ships' libraries.
The nomenclature also commemorates scientists such as mathematician Condorcet* and chemist Lavoisier* whose lives were taken by the Terror (see the glossary) with its indiscriminate repression and expeditious trials. By the same token, nomenclature also condemns this paroxysmal revolutionary moment.
In tune with the geographical mission of the voyage the names of several iconic geographers who edited well-known atlases were recognised. A bay was named after the cartographer Jean Baptiste Bourguignon d'Anville*. A cape and an island pay tribute to members of the Cassini family, authors of the first general map of France, prepared by using the triangulation method. Jean Nicolas Buache* (1741 1825), who had been the king’s geographer and was advising Freycinet at the Dépôt des Cartes in Paris, was acknowledged with a cap and a harbour in Tasmania and with an island in Western Australia. The geographer Edme Mentelle* (1730-1815), a member of the Institut, was also honoured with a cape in Western Australia.  However, it was Charles-Pierre Claret de Fleurieu*, a geographer and cartographer, who was also an officer in the navy, who was accorded the most place names, with a bay, a river and an island in Van Diemen’s Land (Tasmania) and a large peninsula in Terre Napoléon, on the southern end of the Gulf Joséphine in today’s South Australia. This was to be expected, as Fleurieu had played a crucial role in several ways in the voyage commanded by Baudin. He was responsible for drawing up its general instructions and itinerary and was a member of the commission that prepared the voyage. He was also a member of key scientific institutions, especially l’ Institut* and the Bureau des longitudes* that assessed the voyage’s scientific results through reports and reviews. He was in a close relationship with the minister of the navy at the time of the expedition’s return, and was familiar with the Dépôt des Cartes et Plans*, where he was editing the charts of his major Atlas of the Kattegat and the Baltic, at the same time that Freycinet was compiling the charts of the voyage.
Another important mission of these voyages of discovery was to collect samples of flora, fauna and rocks and minerals that were handed over, identified and classified after the return of the expedition by prominent scientists who were members of the Museum National d’Histoire Naturelle (see the glossary), like André Thouin*, and René Louiche-Desfontaines*, who were also rewarded with a place name. Péron also paid homage to past botanists who had contributed to the classification of plants and animals into genera and species, such as the seventeenth century botanist Joseph Pitton de Tournefort* and the dynasty of the Jussieu family. Péron pays tribute to Antoine Laurent de Jussieu*, who was part of the commission that organised the Baudin voyage and who also proposed the classification of three groups of plants according to their number of cotyledons.
Other scientists who were contemporaries of Péron comprehended and classified the natural world through the notions of evolution, non-fixity of species and 'transformism' (the gradual transformation of species through generations), and have their names also commemorated in the nomenclature. They include those of Georges-Louis Leclerc, known as Comte de Buffon*, Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire*, Bernard de Lacépède* and Jean-Baptiste Lamarck*. The theories of these naturalists diverged from the notion of a fixed order developed by Péron’s patron, Georges Cuvier*, who was however rewarded with three place names. In so doing, the nomenclature brings to light the major scientific debates of the time.
In addition, Péron dedicated some place names to some unfortunate botanists who worked tirelessly in the service of their nation. Philibert Commerson*, the naturalist on Antoine de Bougainville’s voyage and other explorations who died before he could publish the results of his work; Robert de Lamanon*, who died during the La Pérouse expedition*; Joseph Dombey*, who was sent on an official mission to the United States but was captured by privateers and  imprisoned in Montserrat (a British island in the West Indies), where he died in 1794, and Pierre Sonnerat* who was imprisoned by the British at Yanaon (India) for twenty years.
Several entomologists are honored, such as Pierre-André Latreille*, who worked at the Museum National d’Histoire Naturelle and assisted Lamarck in his public lectures on invertebrates, and Guillaume-Antoine Olivier*, who gathered a large collection of specimens during his travels in the Ottoman Empire, Egypt and Persia. Unusually, the naturalist Louis-Jean-Marie Daubenton (1716 –1800), who worked with Thouin, Jussieu and Desfontaines, received a place name in Péron’s narrative (Baie Daubenton in Victoria), but not in Freycinet’s atlas.
The nomenclature also pays tribute to scientists engaged in new fields of research, such as geology, that contributed to the vitality of science in France. The term 'geology' was first used in the mid-eighteenth century, following the introduction of new scientific methods in the investigation of the Earth’s history. It had formerly been included under the umbrella term of natural history. This led to the formulation of new theories and to animated debates. Faujas de Saint-Fond* and Déodat de Dolomieu*. Both geologists were honoured with place names, as was René Just Haüy* (1743-1822), a noted mineralogist and crystallographer. Horace Bénédict de Saussure*, a distinguished Swiss geologist who had investigated the origins of the Alps, was also rewarded with a place name.
A few other place names represent the development of another emergent discipline, which Péron termed 'anthropologie' in a memoir submitted in June 1800 to Cuvier and read at the Institut. Péron named two localities after leading scientists who were involved in the development of the new discipline: Joseph-Marie Dégérando* who provided the Baudin expedition with specific instructions and questionnaires to instruct them in the observation of the 'sauvage', and Constantin-François Chassebœuf de La Giraudais, Comte Volney* who suggested methods for observing societies based on Republican ethics and duties.
However, the place names relating to natural history total just under half of those linked to mathematical and nautical sciences and cover a wide range of disciplines. This strongly reflects the change in emphasis in the sciences during the Napoleonic period, which led to the establishment of a hierarchy among disciplines, with mathematics and physics seen as the 'exact' sciences, at the top. The collective field of the study of natural history was divided into new specialised disciplines, such as biology, comparative anatomy, geology, anthropology and zoology. Over time, the various disciplines were further subdivided into specialist fields of study. The term geology, for example, includes the subjects of stratigraphy, mineralogy, palaeontology and volcanology, among many others, while branches of zoology are named vertebrate and invertebrate zoology, comparative anatomy, animal physiology and more. In addition, a new system of classification of plants and animals was developed.
In that respect, the collection of the names of scientists which Péron and Freycinet include in their nomenclature testify to the significance, configuration and vitality of French sciences during the Napoleonic period.
The Place names honouring French literature and art
Attaching many names of people associated with literature and the arts to place names in other countries was unusual. However, atypically, Péron and Freycinet included in their list the names 64 men and women of letters from the sixteenth to the early nineteenth centuries, whose works regained popularity during or after the French Revolution. Chronologically, three sixteenth century humanists philosophers whose fame was revived by the Revolution and the Empire received a place name, while 26 place names were respectively and evenly given to the emblematic philosophers and authors of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries who promoted French philosophy and literature. Women of letters were equally included, especially those who developed new literary genres dear to the empress Joséphine. Yet, none of the well-known women of letters who lost their life during the Terror defending their ideals of freedom and equality at the time when Joséphine was herself incarcerated (Mmes Roland and Olympe de Gouge), and none of the contemporary famous but polemical women of letters such as Mmes de Récamier and Germaine de Staël, who were forced into exile, were recognised in Péron and Freycinet’s nomenclature because their political thinking was at odds with Napoléon’s imperial views, at the time when the emperor authorised his government to sponsor the official publications of the voyage.
Following their established practice, contemporary artists, who Napoléon had assigned to glorify his reign through their artwork, together with classical or neoclassical masters of painting who trained or influenced them, also obtained a place name.
To sum up, Péron and Freycinet’s choice of names established a nomenclature of authors and artists who contributed most to the glory of the nation and the empire and ignored those whose ideas directly or indirectly contradicted the Napoleonic regime.
The place names honouring administrative, military and Navy officers
Administrative officers and ministers
The nomenclature also pays respect to the political and military figures regarded as being role models when serving the nation. Altogether 152 place names refer to the names of military and state officers. Their distribution is equally balanced, with about a third of place names dedicated to administrators and ministers, another third to officers of the Army, and the last third to naval officers. Within each of these categories, a third served during the Napoleonic period, while two thirds had served past kings. Personalities who had been involved in the Revolution are not represented, as their revolutionary ideals were contrary to Napoléon’s ascension to the imperial throne.
The place names accorded to Napoléon’s administrative and government officials included advisers and ministers who had served or were still serving under him, and others who had served under previous regimes. Among Napoléon’s ministers selected for this honor were: Jean-Baptiste de Nompère de Champagny* and Emmanuel Crétet* from the Ministry of the Interior (the former from 1804 to 1807, the latter from 1807 to 1809), who were instrumental in financing the publications of the historical narrative of the voyage, together with Napoléon’s long- term minister for the navy and the colonies, Denis Decrès*, who arranged the financing of the publication of the nautical and geographical work.
The nomenclature also pays tribute to historical figures of past centuries whose achievements strengthened the French state and nation, such as the first ministers of Henri IV, Louis XIII and Louis XIV, respectively Maximilien de Béthune, duc de Sully*, Cardinal Armand Jean du Plessis, duc de Richelieu* and Jean-Baptiste  Colbert*, whose policies had been crucial to the development of the French navy and to colonial trade and the empire. Sébastien Le Prestre de Vauban*, considered the greatest military engineer of his time and admired by Napoléon, was also given a place name.
By contrast, the names of only three senior officials from the reigns of Louis XV and Louis XVI (until 1789) appear in their nomenclature, Joseph-François Dupleix*, Antoine-Jean Amelot de Chaillou* and Chrétien-Guillaume de Lamoignon de Malesherbes*, although other ministers were actively involved in the redevelopment of the French navy, enabling it to compete with the British navy. This more favourable recognition given to governmental and political figures of the 17th century compared to that of their successors in the 18th century is an indication that reconciliation of the nation with its immediate monarchical past when Louis XV and Louis XVI reigned was not yet an option. It also shows that the nomenclature helped to facilitate the introduction of a new historical narrative, according to which the reputation of purposely chosen officials who had served in earlier times but had often been forgotten, was revived and elevated by Napoléon to national hero status, which contributed to the formation of a new image of the nation among its citizens. Joseph-François Dupleix*, for example, gained a reputation as a genius during the Napoleonic Empire, because in his role as an administrator in India he had confronted the British, who Napoléon regarded as his worst enemy. During his own lifetime Dupleix had been disregarded and was forced by Louis XV to resign his position.
Military commanders
This new national narrative was instrumental in bringing to greater notice the names of many French army officers, who now came to be regarded as heroes, especially those who had fought with Bonaparte in his successful Italian campaign against European coalition forces hostile to revolutionary France, which began in 1796. Many of these officers later became Marshals of the French Empire and/or Comte d’Empire. Fallen heroes of the battlefields were also honoured.
Among past military commanders, Henri de La Tour d'Auvergne, known as Turenne*, was remembered because Napoléon had praised his military genius. The emperor held two knights from the 14th to the 15th centuries, known as Bayard* and Duguesclin* (or Du Guesclin), in high esteem, and reinforced the memory and cult of Jeanne d’Arc*, venerated by the French as a martyr, as well as that of Jeanne Hachette*, a woman who in 1472 is said to have fought valiantly and heroically with just an axe to keep the city of Beauvais in the hands of the king of France.
Navy officers
The nomenclature pays homage to the chief Navy officers who were contemporaries of Péron and Freycinet and to past seventeenth century’s naval officers who took part in fearsome sea battles. A range of naval officers from the 18th century who had contributed in some way to the modernisation of the French Navy and officers who saw service in the Levant Fleet were hand-picked by Péron and, principally, by Freycinet. These included the tactician Luc Urbain du Bouexic, Comte de Guichen*, the strategist Pierre André de Suffren de Saint Tropez, Bailly de Suffren*, referred to by the British as “Admiral Satan”, Roland-Michel Barrin, Marquis de La Galissonnière*, who was also a man of science and contributed to the development of an educated and trained navy, and Charles Louis du Couëdic*, who fought against the English during the American Revolutionary War. Also honoured with place names were officers who saw service in the Levant Fleet: Anne Antoine, Comte d’Aché (Daché)* and Bertrand François Mahé, Comte de La Bourdonnais*.
The place names paying homage to Napoléon and his relatives
Finally, 25 place names honored the emperor and his family, especially in South Australia (19), which was the contested coast, where both Matthew Flinders and the chroniclers of Baudin’s voyage claimed the right of first discovery. Amidst the confusion of the situation, and perhaps taking some advantage from it, Péron and Freycinet named the whole length of the previously uncharted coast, that used to be known as the 'unknown coast', 'Terre Napoléon', and its two major gulfs, Golfe Napoléon (Spencer Gulf) and Golfe Joséphine (St Vincent Gulf).
The large gulf on the north western coast of Western Australia was attributed to Napoléon’s brother Joseph (Golfe Joseph Bonaparte). The name has been retained in its AusE version as Joseph Bonaparte Gulf or more commonly as Bonaparte Gulf. Napoléon’s other brothers, Louis* and Jérôme*, his sisters Eliza*, Pauline* and Caroline*, his adopted children from Joséphine, Hortense* and Eugène*, were all given place names grouped in the western part of Terre Napoléon and the two South Australian gulfs. The name of Napoléon’s mother, Laetitia, as well as Joséphine’s niece and stepdaughters, Stéphanie* and Adèle* are also part of this nomenclature. The names of Joseph and Eugène's spouses, Julie* and Amélie*, have been given to places next to those bearing the names of their husbands. Joséphine’s lady-in-waiting, Adélaïde de La Rochefoucauld, was given a place name in Golfe Joséphine (Cap La Rochefoucault). Lucien Bonaparte is Napoléon’s only brother absent from the nomenclature. He had been banned by Napoléon from any mention in the list of princes of the imperial family because of his opposition to the emperor and despite his astute action during the coup d’état of the 18 Brumaire (9 November 1799) that saved Napoléon Bonaparte and gave him control of the situation.

6. The relevance of the nomenclatures of d’Entrecasteaux’s and Baudin’s voyages
The nomenclatures of D’Entrecasteaux’s and of Péron and Freycinet represent two differing intentions in their choices of place names. The former follows on from that of La Perouse's voyage, where La Pérouse gave the places discovered by his expedition names relating mainly to the geography of the coast, to his officers and savants, and the course of the voyage. Similarly, D’Entrecasteaux’s names gave credit to the work and achievements of his crew and his two vessels, while, at the same time, in the midst of the revolutionary period, the commander did his best to avoid any controversial names with political connotations and outside the scope of the expedition itself. By contrast, Péron and Freycinet created their nomenclature in honour of the French nation, its main actors, heroes and personalities of past centuries who were elevated to the rank French national icons, and its new imperial dynasty. More generally, their nomenclature reflects the Napoleonic imperial dream, based chiefly on the development of a technocratic and scientific elite, and a national narrative filled with heroes and great men and women, victories and epic battles. Whilst D’Entrecasteaux’s nomenclature had not been challenged by the authorities of the time, that of Péron and Freycinet was soon contested at various levels. For its part, the Ministry of the Interior was frustrated in as much as some influential public servants of the ministry were not included, while 'very obscure men were immortalised' (probably a reference to the names of relatively anonymous public servants such as Forestier, a human resources officer in the Ministry for the Navy and Colonies, who had been helpful to Péron). Moreover, Freycinet had to justify why the high-ranking naval officer Gantheaume* had only been honored with the name of a cape on the large island whose named was devoted to Decrès* (today’s Kangaroo Island). Freycinet explained his choice of that name in a letter written in June 1812 to Decrès.
…The name of Gantheaume has moreover been chosen as the name of the most illustrious general officer after that of the Minister who directs all the branches of this part of the public service. I think it is necessary to notify Your Excellence that the name of the Admiral has been applied, moreover, to an island of ten leagues circumference, which is situated on the north coast of New Holland at 120 ° of longitude. However, Monseigneur, if it seems proper to you to omit from the nomenclature of Île Decrès the name of Cape Gantheaume, it will be straightforward to substitute another for it, because Monsieur Péron in the first volume of the history of the voyage did not mention it. I could substitute that of Cape Jean Barth…
Decrès commented on the issue in a short note in the margin of the letter, with some humour:
Even so Gantheaume has [like me] an island [named after him], I'm glad to keep him [to keep also his name] in mine.
Other obstacles postponed further publication of the volumes and atlas of the voyage: On the one hand, foreign scientists were not pleased, as eminent scientists such as Humboldt were not part of the nomenclature. On the other hand, the publication was delayed following the divorce of Napoléon from Joséphine in 1810 to marry the archduchess Marie Louise, the eldest daughter of the emperor of Austria, who became the new empress of the French (in fact, similarly to Marie Antoinette Archduchess of Austria who married Louis XVI). Consequently, in 1806, when working on the historical narrative of the voyage, Péron selected the names of Joséphine and her children as representatives of the imperial family, but, by 1810, when Freycinet was completing the account and the geographical atlas of the voyage for publication, it was Marie Louise who was the Empress of the French. From then on, and until 1814, Marie Louise was the representative, together with the child she had with Napoléon, of the imperial family. This added complication to the publication of Freycinet’s atlas which now included names that were no longer relevant.
As Madame de Chastenay forthrightly explains in her memoirs about these various mishaps concerning the voyage's place names:
The ministry refused to complete the publication of the expedition to Terra Australis, but did nothing, stood still and hampered any action. Several reasons contributed to that: the nomenclature of all the islands, capes, points and rocks was borrowed, no more, like before, to the almanac and the navigators, but from the imperial calendar and the Institut; foreign scientists were not happy about that. The name of M. de Humboldt did not receive a place in a work where the names of very obscure men were immortalised and, in a very bad form, the author refused to mention the names of public servants very influential in the Ministry of the Interior, which viewed them as being extremely central.
But the biggest obstacle, during the reign of Marie-Louise, lay in the name of the living Josephine, and we know how insurmountable obstacles become when they are not altogether considered.
Péron and Freycinet’s imperial nomenclature became even more inappropriate when Freycinet's nautical and geographical narrative that describes places and the atlas that positioned them were finally published, in 1815, after the Napoleonic regime had come to an end and the emperor had been sent into exile at St Helena. Freycinet, fully aware of the political inappropriateness of the place names following the restoration of the monarchy, attempted to justify the publication when he wrote:
Before publishing the nautical part of the voyage myself and to continue Péron's account, I would have liked to change a nomenclature that today the political and moral situation of France and Europe repels.; but the first volume had already been on sale for several years, the second was impatiently awaited by a large number of subscribers and it was probably more important to satisfy the public than to suppress the rest of a book whose nomenclature, in the final analysis, cannot harm the nature or the importance of the facts.
More controversially, the nomenclature failed to respect, in large sections, the European sacrosanct ‘right of first discovery’ by the British navigator Matthew Flinders, which granted him the naming rights along parts of the southern coast of Australia. The disregard of this practice infuriated the British Admiralty. Consequently, more than half of Péron and Freycinet’s place names were removed from the nomenclature and replaced by British names during the colonisation of Australia. This prompted Charles de Fleurieu’s great nephew, Alphonse de Fleurieu, in the late nineteenth century, to lobby the British Government for the restitution of some names that related to features left unnamed by Flinders or by previous navigators. Of the 32 names Alphonse de Fleurieu sought to claim back in South Australia, eight were restored, among them that of Fleurieu Peninsula.
Today, about half of the place names (360) from the d’Entrecasteaux and Baudin expeditions are registered in an Australian English translation in the database of the Composite Gazetteer of Australia. They represent mostly the names of French scientists and of the ships’ crews. Other place names that have been retained generally have ‘historical’ connotations. The following chapters provide an insight into the meanings and the significance of the initial 671 names given to places in Australia by the French. The choice of most of these names was determined by the authors’ commitment to laud the national esteem that the Napoleonic empire had restored. That their scheme backfired following the emperor’s demise provides us with an example of the twists and turns of human history.
